With reference to the dramatic devices used throughout the play, explore how J. B. Priestley depicts responsibility in “An Inspector Calls”

J. B. Priestley uses the guilt and the responsibility for Eva Smith’s death to make the audience hate Mr Birling and Mrs Birling, as they don’t regret their actions and don’t take any responsibility, and forgive Sheila and Eric, as they do regret their decisions and take full responsibility, but more specifically to make capitalists seem selfish and to show how socialism is the way forward.

J. B. Priestley demonstrates how Mr Birling takes no responsibility for Eva Smith’s death throughout the play which makes the audience hate Mr Birling. Mr Birling reveals his hubristic nature when he replies to eric with “Rubbish! If you don’t come down on some of these people, they’d soon be asking for Earth”, which demonstrates his stubbornness to accept that he was responsible for Eva Smith’s death. J. B. Priestley uses proleptic irony when Mr Birling replies to Gerald with “so long as we behave ourselves don’t get into the police court or start a scandal – eh?”, Mr Birling says this and yet later in the play he causes a scandal by firing Eva Smith only because she wanted slightly higher pay which is Proleptic irony. J. B. Priestley demonstrates Mr Birling’s overconfidence when he warns the Inspector by saying “Perhaps I ought to warn you that he’s an old friend of mine, and that I see him fairly frequently” this reveals his lack of moral responsibility.

J. B. Priestley shows how Sheila takes the responsibility for Eva Smith’s death which makes her become more mature and regretful after her interrogation throughout the play to make the audience forgive Sheila despite her mistakes. J. B. makes Sheila say “(miserably) So I’m really responsible”, the stage directions hint that Sheila takes full responsibility of her actions. Before the Inspector enters the play Sheila says to her mother “yes, go on, Mummy. You must drink to our health” the word choice of “Mummy” shows how Sheila acts immature before her interrogation. Sheila pleads to her mother to stop while her mother is being interrogated “No Mother - please” the word choice of “Mother” demonstrates that Sheila has matured from before her interrogation and after her interrogation which makes the audience forgive Sheila for her mistakes.

J. B. Priestley reveals how Eric and Sheila’s relationship change throughout the play from them both trying to aggravate each other but near the end of the play, agree with each other and stay this way even after the Inspector was discovered to not have been in the police force. Near the start of the play Sheila attempts to annoy Eric by saying “You’re squiffy.” and Eric replies with “I’m not”, Sheila uses the command word “You’re” to aggravate Eric which demonstrates the sibling rivalry between them and how they would try to use anything they could against each other. Eric replies during the Inspector’s interrogation with “That wouldn’t have worked” and Sheila agrees by saying “Of course it wouldn’t”, the word choice of “Of course” demonstrates that Eric and Sheila agree with each other and are on the same side and still take responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. After the Inspector leaves Sheila says “(bitterly) I suppose we’re all nice people now. […] She’s right though”, the sarcasm demonstrates Sheila’s change from before and after the interrogation when before she would fight with Eric but now, she agrees with Eric to show that they have both matured and have accepted that they were responsible which this makes the audience forgive them.

J. B. Priestley presents the adults as people who would take no responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. Mrs Birling acts stubborn when she says to the Inspector “But I accept no blame for it all” this demonstrates Mrs Birlings a person who would never take any responsibility for the death of anybody like Eva Smith. Mr Birling tells the Inspector that he “told the girl to clear out, and she went” which is Euphemism as he describes the act of firing Eva Smith as “clear out” as he tries to make himself not seem like a bad person for firing her which hints at how he would not take any responsibility for people like Eva Smith. Mrs Birling stereotypes Eva Smith by saying “As if a girl of that sort would ever refuse money!” this demonstrates her lack of respect for Eva Smith which shows how she would never take any responsibility for Eva Smith’s death.

J. B. Priestley reveals how Mr Birling does not change from before and after the interrogation and does not take any responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. Mr Birling, during his interrogation replies to the Inspector with “(rather impatiently) Yes, yes. Horrid business” which both the stage directions and the euphemistic description demonstrate how Mr Birling has not taken any responsibility for his actions, “(rather impatiently)” shows how he wants to get off the subject of Eva Smith’s death as soon as possible as he is in denial that he was a part of the painful death of Eva Smith, Mr Birling then describes the painful agony she went through as “Horrid business”, to further make him seem like the actions he committed were not as bad as the Inspector portrayed. Mr Birling says to the Inspector during Sheila’s Inspection “Not doing her work properly?”, Mr Birling becomes prejudice against Eva Smith because she had organised the strike at his works and now expects her to have done little work at Millwards even after knowing that he was partially to blame for Eva Smith’s death, which reveals how he doesn’t take any responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. Mr Birling expects that Eva Smith would resort to stealing after being fired from his works with the euphemistic question “Go on the streets?”, this shows how he still is in denial even after his interrogation and to make Eva Smith seem worse than him so that he doesn’t seem that bad revealing how he still does not take any responsibility for Eva Smith’s death even after his interrogation which makes the audience hate him further.

J. B. Priestley reveals how Mrs Birling does not change her views on causing Eva Smith’s death before and after her interrogation. Mrs Birling blames the girl despite doing nothing wrong during the Inspector’s interrogation when she says “First, the girl herself.”, this reveals Mrs Birling’s stubbornness to accept that she was partly to blame for Eva Smith’s death which shows how she wouldn’t take any responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. J. B. Priestley uses stage directions to reveal how Mrs Birling now regrets what she has done “(Thunderstruck) My God! But – look here-” but only because she knew that she made it worse for Eric and not for Eva Smith which reveals how she still does not take responsibility for Eva Smith’s death. J. B. Priestley uses stage directions to show how Mrs Birling changes to how she used to act before the Inspector arrived “(coming to life) I should think not. Eric, I’m absolutely ashamed of you.” Which demonstrates that she has not learnt or changed from the Inspector.

In conclusion, Both Sheila and Eric take full responsibility for their actions against Eva Smith while Gerald takes a little responsibility for his actions and but still tries to justify parts of his mistakes and then tries to act as if the interrogation never happened, and Mr and Mrs Birling, during their interrogation don’t take any responsibility for their actions despite clearly being part of Eva Smith’s death.
